Refactor OpenAPI learn page (#3317)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: learn/guides/ballerina-openapi-support.md

redirect_from:
  - /learn/how-to-use-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/how-to-use-openapi-tools
  - /learn/using-the-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/using-the-openapi-tools
  - /swan-lake/learn/using-the-openapi-tools/
  - /swan-lake/learn/using-the-openapi-tools
  - /learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/openapi
  - /learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/openapi/
  - /learn/ballerina-openapi-support/openapi
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#using-the-capabilities-of-the-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#using-the-capabilities-of-the-openapi-tools
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#openapi-validator-compiler-plugin/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#openapi-validator-compiler-plugin
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi
---

> 

Reviewer: Shall we add a brief paragraph introducing the openAPI concept and its purpose? @hevayo WDYT?

Author: Yeah, In here the brief description will be added when the page load on website, which we added in the intro section in line number 08 🙂

## Using the Capabilities of the OpenAPI Tools

> The OpenAPI tools provide the following capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina OpenAPI tooling support provides the following capabilities.
```

>  1. Generate the Ballerina service stub or client stub for a given OpenAPI definition (use `openapi` command).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. Generating Ballerina service/client stubs from a given OpenAPI contract file, using the CLI tool.
```

>  2. Export the OpenAPI definition of a given Ballerina service (use `openapi` command).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 2. Exporting the OpenAPI definition from a given Ballerina service implementation, using the CLI tool.
```

>  3. Validate service implementation of a given OpenAPI contract (annotate your Ballerina service with `openapi` annotation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 3. Validating the service implementation compliance with a provided OpenAPI contract, using the OpenAPI annotation.
```

    - The OpenAPI compiler plugin will allow you to validate a service implementation against an OpenAPI contract during
  the compile time.This plugin ensures that the implementation of a service does not deviate from its OpenAPI contract.   
 

>  Prerequisite : Download and install the latest Ballerina version from [here](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).

Reviewer: Do we need this `prerequisites`section in here?

Author: Earlier we didn't add `prerequisites` to learn a page in openapi, here add with the concern if some user comes to the page with a direct search ballerina openapi without going through the early step. I think we can remove this in here as well 🤔 
WDYT? shall I remove this :) ?

> ## Generate service from OpenAPI (Design-First)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Generating Ballerina services from the OpenAPI definition (Design-First Approach)
```

Reviewer: @lnash94 Lets modify the other titles accordingly

> The Design First approach advocates for designing the API’s contract first before writing any code. If you want to generate the Ballerina service only, you can use the below CLI command in the OpenAPI tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Design First approach advocates for designing the API’s contract first before writing any code. 

If you want to generate the Ballerina service only, you can use the below CLI command in the OpenAPI tool.
```

#### Annotation for Validator Plugin
The `@openapi:ServiceInfo` annotation is used to bind the service with an OpenAPI Contract. You need to add this annotation to the service file with the required values for enabling the validations. **Note :** Providing a `contract` path attribute is mandatory for OpenAPI validator.

The following is an example of annotation usage in ballerina file.
```ballerina
import ballerina/openapi;

@openapi:ServiceInfo{
    contract: “/path/to/openapi.json|yaml”,
    [ tag : “store” ],
    [ operations: [“op1”, “op2”] ] 
    [ failOnErrors]: true/false → default : true
    [ excludeTags ]: [“pets”, “user”]
    [ excludeOperations: [“op1”, “op2”] ]
   }
service greet on new http:Listener(9090) {
    ...
}

```

Please refer the following [OpenAPI annotation reference](#openapi-annotation-reference) for annotation attributes details.

## Generate client from OpenAPI specification
If you want to generate the Ballerina client only, you can set the mode as the client when running the OpenAPI tool. The generated client can be used in your applications to call the service defined in the OpenAPI file.

> - **Note :** Before generating a client using the command-line tool, please check if a pre-generated client exists in [ballerina central](https://central.ballerina.io/). If found, you can find more information on how to use the client in your code by referring to the API documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Note :** Before generating your client using the command-line tool, please check if a pre-generated client for your API already exists in the [Ballerina Central](https://central.ballerina.io/). (If so, you can refer to the client's API documentation for more information on how to use the pre-generated client in your code.)
```

---
layout: ballerina-openapi-support-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Ballerina OpenAPI Support 

> description: Check out how the Ballerina OpenAPI tooling makes it easy for users to start developing a service documented in the OpenAPI contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Check out how the Ballerina OpenAPI tooling makes it easy for you to start developing a service documented in an OpenAPI contract.
```

keywords: ballerina, programming language, openapi, open api, restful api
permalink: /learn/ballerina-openapi-support/
active: openapi

> intro: OpenAPI Specification is a specification that creates a RESTFUL contract for APIs, detailing all of its resources and operations in a human and machine-readable format for easy development, discovery, and integration. Ballerina OpenAPI tooling will make it easy for users to start the development of a service documented in an OpenAPI contract in Ballerina by generating Ballerina service and client skeletons. It supports the user to take the code first API design approach by generating an OpenAPI contract for the given service implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
intro: OpenAPI Specification is a specification that creates a RESTFUL contract for APIs by detailing all of its resources and operations in a human and machine-readable format for easy development, discovery, and integration. Ballerina OpenAPI tooling will make it easy for you to start the development of a service documented in an OpenAPI contract in Ballerina by generating a Ballerina service and client skeletons. It enables you to take the code-first API design approach by generating an OpenAPI contract for the given service implementation.
```

redirect_from:
  - /learn/how-to-use-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/how-to-use-openapi-tools
  - /learn/using-the-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/using-the-openapi-tools
  - /swan-lake/learn/using-the-openapi-tools/
  - /swan-lake/learn/using-the-openapi-tools
  - /learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/openapi
  - /learn/tooling-guide/cli-tools/openapi/
  - /learn/ballerina-openapi-support/openapi
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#using-the-capabilities-of-the-openapi-tools/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#using-the-capabilities-of-the-openapi-tools
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#openapi-validator-compiler-plugin/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/#openapi-validator-compiler-plugin
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi/
  - /learn/cli-documentation/openapi
---

## Using the Capabilities of the OpenAPI Tools

The Ballerina OpenAPI tooling support provides the following capabilities.

>  1. Generating Ballerina service/client stubs from a given OpenAPI contract file, using the CLI tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 1. Generating Ballerina service/client stubs from a given OpenAPI contract file using the CLI tool.
```

>  2. Exporting the OpenAPI definition from a given Ballerina service implementation, using the CLI tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 2. Exporting an OpenAPI definition from a given Ballerina service implementation using the CLI tool.
```

>  3. Validating the service implementation compliance with a provided OpenAPI contract, using the OpenAPI annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 3. Validating the service implementation compliance with a provided OpenAPI contract using the OpenAPI annotation.
```

>     - The OpenAPI compiler plugin will allow you to validate a service implementation against an OpenAPI contract during

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The OpenAPI compiler plugin will allow you to validate a service implementation against an OpenAPI contract during
```
Shall we make this an info section?

>   the compile time.This plugin ensures that the implementation of a service does not deviate from its OpenAPI contract. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the compile time. This plugin ensures that the implementation of a service does not deviate from its OpenAPI contract. 
```

>  > Prerequisite : Download and install the latest Swan Lake Ballerina version from [here](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 > Prerequisite : Download and install the latest Swan Lake Ballerina version from [here](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).
```
Shall we make this a separate section at the top before giving the instructions?

>  > Prerequisite : Download and install the latest Swan Lake Ballerina version from [here](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 > Prerequisite: Download and install the [latest Swan Lake Ballerina version](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).
```

SwanLake versions support for your OpenAPI specification with version 3.0.0

> ## Generating Ballerina Service from the OpenAPI Definition (Design-First Approach)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Generating a Ballerina Service from an OpenAPI Definition (Design-First Approach)
```
better to remove the part within the brackets.

> If you want to generate the Ballerina service only, you can use the below CLI command in the OpenAPI tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to generate only the Ballerina service, you can use the below CLI command of the OpenAPI tool.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract> --mode service
```
This generated service can be used as a code template to start the service implementation.

Example: 
```bash
$ bal openapi -i hello.yaml --mode service
```

This will generate a Ballerina service for the `hello.yaml` OpenAPI contract named `hello-service` and schemas named types. The above command can be run from anywhere on the execution path. It is not mandatory to run it from within a Ballerina project.

```bash
The service generation process is complete. The following files were created.
-- hello-service.bal
-- types.bal
```

> #### Generating Ballerina Service by tags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Generating Ballerina Service from Tags
```
Do we need to specify from which tags?

> To generate the Ballerina service stub with a subset of tags defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the options `--tags` and specify the tags you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the Ballerina service stub with a subset of tags defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the `--tags` option, and specify the tags you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract> [--tags <"tag1","tag2">]
```

**Example :**
```bash
$ bal openapi -i hello.yaml --tags "pets", "list"
```

> Once you execute the command, only the operations related to given tags will include in generated service file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you execute the command, only the operations related to the given tags will be included in the generated service file.
```

> **See more command options :** 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Info:** For more command options, see 
```

[OpenAPI to Ballerina Command Reference](#openapi-to-ballerina-command-reference)

> ## Exporting OpenAPI from a Ballerina service (Code-First Approach)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Exporting an OpenAPI Contract from a Ballerina service (Code-First Approach)
```
Better to remove the part within the brackets.

> You developer can convert your Ballerina service APIs into a human-readable or machine-readable document such as OpenAPI documents by using the below the Ballerina to OpenAPI command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can convert your Ballerina service APIs into human-readable or machine-readable documents such as OpenAPI documents by using the below Ballerina to OpenAPI command.
```

> #### Using the Ballerina to OpenAPI CLI tool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Using the Ballerina to OpenAPI CLI tool
```
Is it `CLI Tool` or `CLI Command`?

Export the Ballerina service to an OpenAPI Specification 3.0 definition. For the export to work properly, the input Ballerina service should be defined using the basic service and resource-level HTTP annotations.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```bash
```
Need a new line space above.

$ bal openapi [-i | --input] <ballerina-service-file-path> [(-o | --output) <output-location>]
```

> Parameter **ballerina-service-file-path** specifies the path of the ballerina service file (e.g., `my-api.bal`) and is mandatory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ballerina-service-file-path` parameter specifies the path of the Ballerina service file (e.g., `my-api.bal`) and is mandatory.
```

> If your Ballerina file include multiple services, this command generates OpenAPI contract for each service in the Ballerina file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your Ballerina file includes multiple services, this command generates an OpenAPI contract for each service in the Ballerina file.
```

> #### Generating OpenAPI Specification with `json` Format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Generating an OpenAPI Specification in JSON Format
```

> Use `--json` flag If you need the Ballerina service to OpenAPI output as JSON. The default is YAML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `--json` flag If you need the Ballerina service to OpenAPI output in JSON. The default is YAML.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <ballerina resource file> [--json]
```

> #### Generating OpenAPI Specification for Given Service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Generating an OpenAPI Specification from a Service
```

> If you need to document an OpenAPI contract for only one given service, then use this command. Use service name as the service `absolute-resource-path`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to document an OpenAPI contract for only one given service, then use this command. Specify the service name as the `absolute-resource-path`.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <ballerina resource file> [-s|--service] <service-name>
```
**Example :**
```bash
$ bal openapi -i helloService.bal
```
This will generate the OpenAPI contracts for the Ballerina services, which are in the `helloService.bal` Ballerina file.

```bash
$ bal openapi -i helloService.bal -s "/hello"
```

> This will generate the OpenAPI contracts for the Ballerina service which absolute-resource-path is `/hello`, which are in the `helloService.bal` Ballerina file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will generate the OpenAPI contracts for the Ballerina service of which the `absolute-resource-path` is `/hello`, which are in the `helloService.bal` Ballerina file.
```

> #### Generating your OpenAPI Contract with the Given Title and Version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Generating the OpenAPI Contract with a Given Title and Version
```

> You can use annotation for storing title and version information about generated OpenAPI contract in ballerina to OpenAPI tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use an annotation for storing the title and version information about the OpenAPI contract generated via the Ballerina to OpenAPI tool.
```

5. Run necessary unit tests to verify the functionality of the generated connector. 
6. Add license header at the top of each `.bal` file. 
7. Add `Package.md` ([guide here](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-extended-library/discussions/77)) and `Module.md` ([guide here](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-extended-library/discussions/78))
8. Add connector icon to the root of the connector. Icon needs to be a `.png` of 200x200 px size with name `icon.png`. 
9. Update `Ballerina.toml` file referring to the [guide here](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-extended-library/discussions/72).

#### **Step 03:** Send PR to openapi-connectors
1. Run `./gradlew build`. 
2. Push the changes and create a Pull Request to the master branch of the `openapi-connectors` repository.

## OpenAPI to Ballerina Command Reference
```bash
bal openapi [-i | --input] <openapi-contract-file-path> 
            [-o | --output] <output-location>
            [--mode <mode-type>]
            [--tags <tag-names>] 
            [--operations <operation-names>] 
            [-n | --nullable]
            [--license] <license-file-path> 
            [--with-tests]
```

> - ##### -i | - -input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### -i | - -input
```
Why are these level 5 topics?

> Parameter **openapi-contract-path** specifies the path of the OpenAPI contract file (e.g., `my-api.yaml` or `my-api.json`) and is mandatory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `openapi-contract-path` parameter specifies the path of the OpenAPI contract file (e.g., `my-api.yaml` or `my-api.json`) and is mandatory.
```

- ##### -o | - -output

> The Ballerina files will be generated at the same location OpenAPI command is executed. Optionally, you can point to another directory location using the optional flag `(-o|--output)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ballerina files will be generated at the same location from which the OpenAPI command is executed. Optionally, you can point to another directory location by using the optional flag `(-o|--output)`.
```

- ##### - -mode

> Mode type is optional and can be service or client. The Ballerina service and client will be generated according to the mode. Without `--mode` it will generate both service and client stub for the given openAPI contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mode type is optional and can be either a service or client. The Ballerina service and client will be generated according to the mode. Without the `--mode`, it will generate both service and client stubs for the given OpenAPI contract.
```

- ##### - -tags

> To generate the Ballerina client or service stub with a subset of tags defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the options `--tags` and specify the tags you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the Ballerina client or service stub with a subset of tags defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the `--tags` option, and specify the tags you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract>  [--tags < "tag1","tag2">]
```
- ##### - -operations

> To generate the Ballerina client or service stub with a subset of operations defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the options `--operations` and specify the operations you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the Ballerina client or service stub with a subset of operations defined in the OpenAPI contract, use the --operations` option, and specify the operations you need as specified in the OpenAPI definition.
```

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract> [--operations <"op1", "op2">]
```
- ##### - -license
If you want to generate the Ballerina files with the given copyright or license header, you can use this `--license` flag with your copyright text.
```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract> [--license <license-file-path>]
```
- ##### -n |- -nullable

> This is an optional flag in the OpenAPI to Ballerina command. If your OpenAPI specification includes JSON schema properties that are not marked as **nullable:true**, they may return as null in some responses. It will result in a JSON schema to Ballerina record data binding error. If you suspect this can happen for any property, it is safe to generate all data types in the generated record with Ballerina nil support by turning on this flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an optional flag in the OpenAPI to Ballerina command. If your OpenAPI specification includes JSON schema properties that are not marked as `nullable:true`, they may be returned as null in some responses. It will result in a JSON schema to Ballerina record data binding error. If you suspect this can happen for any property, it is safe to generate all data types in the generated record with Ballerina nul support by turning on this flag.
```
Is it `nil` or `nul`?

Author: afaik both can be used. :)

```bash
$ bal openapi -i <openapi contract> [-n |--nullable]
```
- ##### - -with-tests

> This is optional. Work with the client generation command and generate a test boiler-plate for all the remote functions of the generated client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is optional. It works with the client generation command and generates a boiler-plate test for all the remote functions of the generated client.
```

## OpenAPI Annotation Reference

> The `@openapi:ServiceInfo` annotation support for several usages in the Ballerina OpenAPI tools. It contains attributes `contract` , `tag`, `operations`, `failOnErrors`, `excludeTags`, `excludeOperations`, `title`, `version` and `embed` for each particular purpose. These attributes are optional in annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@openapi:ServiceInfo` annotation supports several usages in the Ballerina OpenAPI tool. It contains attributes such as `contract` , `tag`, `operations`, `failOnErrors`, `excludeTags`, `excludeOperations`, `title`, `version`, and `embed` for each particular purpose. These attributes are optional to be used in the annotation.
```

```ballerina
@openapi:ServiceInfo{
    [contract: “/path/to/openapi.json|yaml”],
    [ tag : “store” ],
    [ operations: [“op1”, “op2”] ], 
    [ failOnErrors]: true/false → default : true,
    [ excludeTags ]: [“pets”, “user”],
    [ excludeOperations: [“op1”, “op2”] ],
    [ title : “store” ],
    [ ‘version: “0.1.0” ],
    [embed: false/true -> default: true]
   }
service greet on new http:Listener(9090) {
    ...
}
```

> - ##### Contract: string?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Contract: string?`
```
is the heading level correct?

> Here, you can provide a path to the OpenAPI contract as a string and the OpenAPI file can either be `.yaml` or `.json`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, you can provide a path to the OpenAPI contract as a string and the OpenAPI file can either be a `.yaml` or `.json`. 
```

> - ##### Tags: string[ ]?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Tags: string[ ]?`
```

The compiler will only validate resources against operations, which are tagged with a tag specified in the list. If not specified, the compiler will validate resources against all the operations defined in the OpenAPI contract.

> - ##### Operations: string[ ]?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Operations: string[ ]?`
```

> Should contain a list of operation names that need to be validated against the resources in the service. If not specified, the compiler will validate resources against all the operations defined in the OpenAPI contract. If both tags and operations are defined, it will validate against the union set of the resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This should contain a list of operation names that need to be validated against the resources in the service. If not specified, the compiler will validate resources against all the operations defined in the OpenAPI contract. If both tags and operations are defined, it will validate against the union set of the resources.
```

> - ##### ExcludeTags: string[ ]?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `ExcludeTags: string[ ]?`
```

> This feature is for users to store the tags that do not need to be validated. Annotation can not have both excludeTags and Tags attributes at the same time. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This stores the tags that do not need to be validated. The annotation can not have both the `excludeTags` and `Tags` attributes at the same time. 
```

> - ##### ExcludeOperations: string[ ]?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `ExcludeOperations: string[ ]?`
```

> This feature is for users to store the operations that do not need to be validated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This stores the operations that do not need to be validated.
```

> - ##### FailOnErrors: boolean?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `FailOnErrors: boolean?`
```

If you need to turn off the validation, add this to the annotation with the value as `false`.

> - ##### Title: string?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Title: string?`
```

> You can use this to add the title for the generated OpenAPI contract `info` section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use this to add the title of the `info` section in the generated OpenAPI contract.
```

> - ##### Version: string?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Version: string?`
```

> You can use this to add the version for the generated OpenAPI contract `info` section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use this to add the version of the`info` section in the generated OpenAPI contract.
```

> - ##### Embed: string?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ##### `Embed: string?`
```

> If you need to turn off the generating OpenAPI documentation for service for introspection endpoint support, use this attribute with `false` in the annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to turn off generating OpenAPI documentation for a service, for introspection endpoint support, use this attribute with `false` in the annotation.
```
